[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Prana is our life
force, the flow of radiance
in our individual self.
And when it comes to food
and accessing more radiance,
more life energy, we often
say that the consciousness
of the cook is the most
important ingredient.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> One of the things that
excites me about Ayurveda is
this connection between
diet and the uniqueness
of the individual.
I, time and time again,
see this tragic view
that people come
to me for advice,
and they've whittled
everything away.
They've said, oh, I'm
sensitive to this.
Oh, I've read I
shouldn't be eating that.
Oh, hey, I was told
by this practitioner
I shouldn't have that.
And there's first this giving
over of the individual's power
to something external
and not respecting
the beauty of
intuition, the fact
that we have within
our own awareness
the ability to tap into the
intelligence of the body.
And then it's also
tragic the confusion,
where someone is beating
up on themselves.
They're living by rules
that they can't abide by.
And then they get into guilt
about what they've eaten.
Ayurveda understands
that food is
to be enjoyed, that the most
important quality of any given
meal is its enjoyment.
And if it's not
creating that enjoyment,
it's most likely going to
create problems, toxins, ama.
It's going to block our
ability to digest and absorb.
And so there's nothing
more important.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> If you are
eating in a rushed,
hurried way and just gobbling
up your food and you are really
not succeeding the juices
and giving it time to digest,
the food is going to pass
through without being digested
properly.
And it is going to form what
we call as ama in Ayurveda.
That is toxins.
And those toxins are going
to be absorbed in our system
and manifest in the form
of discomfort or disease.
It is going to put
us out of balance.
That is why, these days,
you see a lot of imbalances,
whether it is children,
or families, or adults--
not mindful about
these routines is
making us more sick than ever.
>> With Ayurveda, every food
is potentially medicine.
Every substance has properties.
And we just need to know
what those properties are
and how they'll
affect our physiology.
So we often talk about creating
our kitchen as a ritual space.
So actually, instead
of buying more,
there's often a lot
of elimination of food
that's stale, food
that's leftover,
food that lacks prana,
food that lacks vitality.
And we buy spices.
We buy fresh food.
But generally, there's
nothing extra to buy.
There's no program to buy
that's packaged for you.
Of course, beyond that, we
want to eat consciously.
Because that allows
us to digest food.
And digested food will create
more liveliness, more vitality
in the body.
Using the freshest
possible ingredients,
eating organic, eating seasonal
foods is also very important.
>> These days, there is what
is called mindful eating,
mindfulness-based eating.
Actually, you're
taught how to eat.
If you pick up a
piece of carrot,
how do you feel, the touch?
What color is it?
When you actually bring
it close to your mouth,
just observe the
secretions of your saliva.
And then take a bite.
And feel it.
And then chew.
Paying attention
and an intention
becomes very important.
Start with that small things--
starting from when you
look at it and pick it up.
Of course, taking all
the gadgets away--
dining room is a space that
you create for only that.
With the question of, why don't
all diets work for all people,
it's really ancient
knowledge-- even
the Greeks knew-- that one man's
meat is another man's poison.
We have different composition
of different elements within us.
And in order to keep
those in balance,
we have to be looking at the
elements that make up the diet.
And if the elements go
too far in one direction,
that's going to pull
us out of balance.
And so that's why I say to my
students, there's no bad foods.
If you know the
quality of the food,
you know when it can
be used to create
what balance that you need
within someone's physiology.
And so each
individual needs to be
able to attune their diet
to what's best for them.
Drink warm water with lemon
juice and honey first thing
in the morning.
OK.
Also, you can drink
chewing coriander, fennel.
In terms of what we put in
our body, for some people,
milk is good.
For some, it's not.
It depends on
their constitution.
Fad diets are promoted so
much through advertisements
that people just
gravitate towards.
Because they make it look good.
That can be good for a few
but not good for everyone.
[BLENDER BUZZING]
Smoothies are a big
thing these days.
What do we combine in smoothies?
We put protein powders.
We put foods.
We put nuts.
We had anything and
everything to make it easy
for us to drink.
And let me tell you,
according to Ayurveda,
it's not compatible.
They are all individually
very healthy.
But when you mix them
together, it produces toxins.
Smoothies are great.
But the main thing is
to not have combinations
of dairy and fruit together.
As an Ayurvedic
doctor, I can tell you,
I have made that mistake.
Just a couple of days
ago, I told myself, well,
I'm going to treat
myself for a smoothie.
I did exactly what I
shouldn't have done.
In almond milk, I put walnuts.
I put a banana.
I put veggie protein mix.
And I put moringa powder.
I put kale and some spinach,
and then blended them all,
and then drank it up--
very good.
I said, ah, breakfast done.
I came to my office, and my
stomach was not feeling good.
My intestines started to gurgle.
And there you go.
I had to run to the bathroom
in between my clients.
And that was not good.
All I can say is that it
is toxic to your system.
And if you don't have the
reaction that what I had,
it can be absorbed as
a toxin in your body
and go through different
tissues, and systems,
and manifest as skin diseases,
and various other systemic
diseases.
Once or twice, it's OK.
But if you're going to be
doing this all the time,
then it affects
your immune system.
And then you are out of balance.
And then you're going
to manifest something.
And so, in Ayurveda, we
don't recommend eating fruits
with grains and not even nuts--
even with other fruits.
When it comes to fruits, eat
it alone, or leave it alone.
That's the rule.
And we don't mix dairy products
with anything sour or fruits.
>> Raw food, raw vegetables,
have a lot of concentrated
prana.
But that prana can
be hard to extract,
because it can be
very rough, and dry,
and hard for the
digestion to break down.
So Ayurveda really
favors cooked food,
because it's easiest for
the digestion to assimilate.
Weight-loss diets are drinks.
Anything that is processed,
anything that is colored,
anything that does
not come naturally
is definitely not
good for anybody.
That's how we accumulate toxins.
When we are unconscious
and blind to just being
attracted to the
advertisements, that's
how we lose connection
with the source.
If we start to
listen to ourselves,
and listen to our
body, and actually take
some time mindfully to even
see what is in that food that
is being packaged so
well and sold to you--
even a few minutes will
make a huge difference.
A basic Ayurvedic diet
comprises of mostly vegetarian.
Ayurveda does not tell you
not to eat non-vegetarian.
But don't make that
as your main meal.
There is always a
proportion of foods
that you're supposed to eat--
solids, half your stomach,
liquids, one fourth
of your stomach, and another
one fourth should be left empty.
So your food should be comprised
of grains, fresh vegetables,
lentils, beans, a
little portion of meat--
whatever you're eating.
But I would not recommend
eating red meat,
unless you really need it.
Eat lots of vegetables,
because our intestines are not
made for meat.
That's why, in
the United States,
there's so much of
constipation-- then
rectal problems because of
a lot of meat consumption.
And when you eat raw salads,
it is very hard on your stomach
to digest.
The cell wall is not
broken down easily.
And the food only stays in
your stomach for some time.
So if we cook or steam foods,
that breaks the cell wall.
And you're actually
helping in aiding digestion
easily and absorbing
nutrients in your body.
When you consume the food,
your food is well-digested.
And there is not undigested
food going through
into the small intestines.
Yes, you can have
salads but at lunchtime
when your metabolism is
really strong and high.
After a meal,
Ayurveda tells you--
and it is very important--
that you take anywhere
from 100 to 200 steps.
Walk-- not brisk walk, not
run, but just a casual walk
just so you help your
food aid in digestion.
Take a casual walk
around your dining table
or around your living room.
Go up and down in your house.
Don't sit on the
couch, and watch TV.
After that, you can relax,
and do what you need to do.
But make sure you go to bed
by 10:00 and not stay up.
Because your body
needs to shut down,
digest, assimilate,
and cleanse internally.
So you have to
give room for that.
>> One of the things that we
encourage patients and clients
to do is to use their intuition,
be able to become sensitive
to what it is that's happening
within the physiology.
So it's one thing to
have general guidelines.
It's another thing to
have that consciousness.
>> Some easy tips that you
can do to help yourself when
you're upset, or when
you're disturbed,
or when you're worried--
you should just sit with
yourself, and breathe.
Watch how you're breathing.
You will notice,
when you're going
through these type of emotions,
your breath becomes shallow.
And the types of thoughts
you're engaged in take a break,
break the circuit.
Create that space between
you and your thoughts,
and anchor yourself
with your breath.
When you do that every day
for about even 10 minutes,
there is a big difference.
You're going to feel
a whole lot better.
>> This is why consciousness
and its development is
so fundamental in Ayurveda.
With that enhanced
awareness, we can
listen to the
intelligence of the body
and know what qualities
it is calling for,
what diet it needs,
and therefore
empower ourselves with a diet
that is truly uniquely ours.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> So the way we
work from a dietary,
nutritional standpoint
Ayurvedically is very much
using these concepts of five
elemental theory along with
the six tastes in their
relationship and how they work
to increase or
decrease the doshas.
We have the six tastes of sweet,
sour, salty, pungent, bitter,
and astringent.
When we look at the last
two, bitter and astringent--
if we give someone
foods that are
rich in bitter and
astringent taste,
these are going to increase
vata dosha in nature.
So the principle
of like increases
like and opposites decrease--
these two concepts that we work
with in Ayurveda with diet.
Brumhana, to increasing,
and Langhana,
of stripping away
and taking away--
we use the six tastes to
either increase specific things
in the body or to strip
away when there's excesses.
Bitter and astringent are going
to be light, airy, scraping,
dry, more cold in nature.
Those are going to
take things away.
So if somebody had that
increase of kapha dosha,
say, overweight, lethargic,
dull in the mind,
we would want to increase
bitter and astringent taste,
and then bring in a little bit
of salt and some slight pungent
to decrease that excess
of earth and water.
So you can kind of see
how the relationship
between these start to play.
Somebody having too much
vata, too much air and space--
maybe they're emaciated.
They're constantly stressed,
nervous system wired out,
insomnia, these types of things.
We're going to want to
increase this earth and water.
We're going to bring
in those last two
tastes of sweet and sour.
Sweet and sour are going to
increase the earth and water
elementals and
decrease vata dosha.
So in this way, we kind of
play with the elementals
as they relate to
the six tastes.
And then what we
understand is what
we can take from outside
in the outside world
to bring it into the body--
this is where we understand food
is medicine and herbs, as well.
We qualify our herbs
based on the six tastes.
>> I had a wonderful mentor.
He used to say, give me
an hour with any person,
and I can teach them the
effect of any substance
in the universe on their body.
And what he would teach
are fundamental elements
and how like increases like.
He talked about this
universal pharmacy,
that if we understand the
quality of something in nature,
then we know its
effect on our body.
He had this wonderful
lecture that he
gave where he took
things in the room,
like the class was having pizza.
And they were having a soda.
He took each of the
dietary things and said,
OK, what's the quality of soda?
And being able to
explain that in terms of,
oh, there's that
fuzziness, that lightness--
and then being able to explain,
OK, that has an airiness to it.
That's going to give an
airiness to the physiology.
And then he asked, well, where
does that airiness come from?
Well, it's the breakdown
of carbonic acid.
Oh, it's very acidic.
So that's going to have a
very fiery effect, as well.
So just taking things and
knowing the qualities,
then we know what's going
to happen to the physiology.
And if we put someone
on a diet of soda,
that acidity is going
to increase fire.
And it's going to increase
the propensity towards things
like gastritis,
things like ulcers,
and problems with inflammation.
And so Ayurveda, in its
essence, is commonsensical.
You don't have to go through
years and years of training
in order to begin to
apply it to your life.
>> If you have eaten a healthy
breakfast, you are not hungry.
Your mood is going to be better.
You don't have to
have quick sugars
or high-caffeinated beverages
for you to function.
Keeping your sugar levels in
balance throughout the day
becomes very important for not
only your body, for your mind
and emotions, too.
So you can always have nuts
to snack on or a fresh fruit
to snack on to keep the
glycemic index even all
throughout the day,
In Ayurveda, being in
balance becomes so important.
There is a daily routine
that we need to follow.
Even in the rhythm
of the nature, when
we look at the morning
sunrise, the heat of the sun
is not very strong.
So the sun itself is
compared to our metabolism.
So knowing that, in
the early morning,
we are not actually having
that high metabolism.
So a light breakfast in
Ayurveda is recommended.
And when we are really hungry,
which is in between 11:00
and 2:00 in the afternoon--
that's our highest metabolic
rate--
that's when we need to
eat our highest protein.
And towards the evening,
when the sun goes down,
our metabolism is low.
That's when we have to eat,
again, early, light dinners.
And we have to go to bed
with our stomachs empty.
Another very important
thing in Ayurveda
is not to have
ice in your water.
What that does is it just
extinguishes your fire
when you're actually eating.
So instead of fueling the
fire, you are putting it out.
>> The idea is to choose foods
and lifestyle activities that
align you with your
natural constitution.
If we're on that
path, we won't be
creating ama inside the body.
And then there's the funny
thing about the 80/20 principle.
The 80/20 principle is eat
super consistent with what
your body absolutely needs.
And then there's that
20% of play we can have,
where if you want
that ice cream, sure,
you can have the ice cream.
And if we live by
these rules usually,
we don't stray too much to
be creating an excess amount
of ama in the body.
>> And this is where having the
concept of the doshas and being
able to describe ourselves,
our nature in terms of these
tendencies, these qualities,
that affords us a blueprint
for us to be able to
then organize diet,
organize routine,
organize activities,
organize supplements in order
to prevent things from going out
of whack.
Knowing that, we can then
take preventive measures.
We can do foods
that are grounded.
We can do routine
that is very regular,
and settled, and
forms a structure
for that grounding-ness that
that airy individual needs.
So there are many
angles of prevention
that either Ayurveda holds--
that it is not only tuned in
to the doshas that make up
our physiology but also tuned
in to the qualities in nature,
the qualities in foods,
spices, herbs, and so forth.
>> So Ayurveda really
values regular meal times.
It really values
sitting down to eat,
sitting and eating in
a relaxed atmosphere
with gentle conversation,
with devices
all put away on a
beautiful table that's
cleared of anything extraneous.
And this ritual of eating
with friends or with family
allows us to extract the
most nutrition from the food.
It allows us to
extract livelihood,
liveliness from the
food that we're eating.
If we eat in a very hurried
way, a distracted way
while we're driving,
while we're standing,
we aren't placing our
attention and our consciousness
into what we're doing,
and it confuses our body.
So to be reading or
to be on a device
while simultaneously eating,
the mind and the body are split.
And in this way, we
cause disjuncture.
We cause disharmony.
We cause disease.
So we place our
attention on the food.
We savor it.
We enjoy it.
And this is almost
more important
than what particular
food we eat.
>> When I teach cooking classes,
I have people experience
the food and experience
first the joy of it,
and the pleasure of it, and the
vibrancy of it before I explain
anything about it so that they
can see in their own awareness,
and start to hone their
intuition, and start to listen.
Oh, my body really
liked that sourness.
OK, well, what is
that telling you?
So like that, tuning into our
own intelligence, the body's
own wisdom, is fundamental in
terms of diet and Ayurveda.
>> Ayurveda is really a
system of self-healing.
It's not a system of
relinquishing your power over
to an expert.
Rather, it is learning
simple tools and techniques
to empower yourself to bring
yourself into your highest
state of well-being.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Don't forget to explore
the rest of this series
by watching our docu-series,
yoga practices, meditations,
and self-care videos.
[MUSIC PLAYING]